The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Rights and
freedoms in
Canada
Fundamental
freedoms
Democratic rights
of citizens
Maximum duration
of legislative bodies
Continuation in
special
circumstances
Annual sitting of
legislative bodies
Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that recognize the supremacy of
God and the rule of law:
Guarantee of Rights and Freedoms
1. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees the rights
and freedoms set out in it subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by
law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.
Fundamental Freedoms
2. Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms:
(a) freedom of conscience and religion;
(b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom
of the press and other media of communication;
(c) freedom of peaceful assembly; and
(d) freedom of association.
Democratic Rights
3. Every citizen of Canada has the right to vote in an election of members of
the House of Commons or of a legislative assembly and to be qualified for
membership therein.
4.(1) No House of Commons and no legislative assembly shall continue for
longer than five years from the date fixed for the return of the writs at a
general election of its members.
(2) In time of real or apprehended war, invasion or insurrection, a House of
Commons may be continued by Parliament and a legislative assembly may be
continued by the legislature beyond five years if such continuation is not
opposed by the votes of more than one-third of the members of the House of
Commons or the legislative assembly, as the case may be.
5. There shall be a sitting of Parliament and of each legislature at least once
every twelve months.
2
Mobility of
citizens
Rights to move and
gain livelihood
Limitation
Affirmative action
programs
Life, liberty and
security of person
Search or seizure
Detention or
imprisonment
Arrest or detention
Proceedings in
criminal and penal
matters
Mobility Rights
6.(1) Every citizen of Canada has the right to enter, remain in and leave
Canada.
(2) Every citizen of Canada and every person who has the status of a
permanent resident of Canada has the right
(a) to move to and take up residence in any province; and
(b) to pursue the gaining of a livelihood in any province.
(3) The rights specified in subsection (2) are subject to
(a) any laws or practices of general application in force in a province
other than those that discriminate among persons primarily on the basis of
province of present or previous residence; and
(b) any laws providing for reasonable residency requirements as a
qualification for the receipt of publicly provided social services.
(4) Subsections (2) and (3) do not preclude any law, program or activity that
has as its object the amelioration in a province of conditions of individuals in
that province who are socially or economically disadvantaged if the rate of
employment in that province is below the rate of employment in Canada.
Legal Rights
7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the
right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of
fundamental justice.
8. Everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure.
9. Everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily detained or imprisoned.
10. Everyone has the right on arrest or detention
(a) to be informed promptly of the reasons therefor;
(b) to retain and instruct counsel without delay and to be informed of
that right; and
(c) to have the validity of the detention determined by way of habeas
corpus and to be released if the detention is not lawful.
11. Any persons charged with an offence has the right
(a) to be informed without unreasonable delay of the specific offence;
(b) to be tried within a reasonable time;
(c) not to be compelled to be a witness in proceedings against that
person in respect of the offence;
(d) to be presumed innocent until proven guilty according to law in a
fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal;Hello